---
published: false
category: class
layout: default
---
**Contains notes for the entire operating system course taken at UCLA. Lecture by Reiher.**

## The OS and Speed ##
One reason OS get big is because of speed.

- It's faster to offer service in OS than outside.
	- If it's process communication, app level requires scheduling and swapping.
    - OS direct access to system services
    	- If application tries, will need to make a request.
    - OS makes direct privileged instructions.

- However, it's not always faster
	- Running standard instructions are no faster.
    - Entering OS involves state saving and mode changing(slow!)
    - If you don't need special OS services, resources are expensive to go into OS
    
## OS and abstractions ##
It offers abstract versions of resources(as opposed to physical resources).

The OS implements a process(abstract) using CPU and RAM(physical). Files(abstract) using disk(physical).

- Why? Programmers like abstraction
	- easier to use than original resources. Don't need to keep track of disk interrupts and etc.
    - Compartmentalize and encapsulate. E.g. files have specific people who can and cannot access.
    	- When we encapsulate, we "think" that we have an interface entirely to ourselves, like the peach idea from the book. Therefore, it's a lot easier than to take into factor other currently running processes.

There are lots of variations in the HW and SW, and therefore OS has to define a standard for each thing.
- E.g. SW: PDF for printers, SCSI for disks/CDs. HW: Different types of printers, disks, etc.
- Involves a **federation framework** (We'll elaborate on this later)
	- I got a general interface, all disk drives -> generic disk drive. 
	- Per sub-type implementations of standard functions
   
Why do we want this generality? One method works for all!

## Common Types of OS Resources ##
1. Serially Reusable Resources
	1. Used by multiple clients but 1 at a time. (Time multiplexer)
    	- Has full control when something is using it. The control disappears after they're done.
    2. Require access control to ensure exclusive use
    3. E.g., printers, bathroom stalls. (Gives graceful transition)
    	- Graceful transition: totally hides the fact that another person used this resource before.
        
2. Partitionable Resource
	1. Divide into disjoint pieces for multiple clients. (Spatial multiplexer)
    	- Has control to contain and hide privacy of its own sector. 
    2. E.x.: RAM and hotel rooms.

3. Shareable Resource
	1. Used by multiple concurrent clients. (e.x.: air)
    2. May involve "under the covers" multiplexinge
    
## The Layers : Kernel ##
- Primary functions that require privilege
- Some operations are out-sourced - system daemons, server processes.

## The Layers : System Services ##
- Not all in the kernel.
	- May not need kernel data structs
- Some are privileged processes
	- Login/user conditions
- Some are trusted
	- E.g. Sendmail is trusted to properly label messages. The server has access to data to label.

# The API #
- Application Program Interface
	- Source level interface
    	- include files
        - data types
        - constants
        - macros
        - routines, parameters
    - Recompile program for desired architecture
    - if API compliant, will be able to run.

# The ABI #
- Application Binary Interface
	- Takes the API and binds it to the hardware architecture.
    - Linkes with DLL's, specifies data formats, calling sequence
    - No privileged instructions in ABI
    
## Side Effects of Interfaces ##
- *side effects* are when action one object does has non-obvious consequences to itself or other objects.
	- Often due to shared state between seemingly independent modules/functions.
    	- Hard to debug - unexpected behaviors!

## Standards ##
- Different than interfaces - interfaces differ from OS to OS(and machine to machine)
- Standards are more global. 
	- E.g. Ipv4 is a standard. If we didn't agree on this, then the internet will **not work!** 
    - If you do follow a standard, others can work with you. If you don't, then you can't.
    
In the dark ages(1965), no software industry. In the software reformation(1985), it's the advent of the "killer application"(desktop publishing, spreadsheets, independent software vendor). 

- Fundamental changes in 1985. 
	- Applications -> demand -> volume cycle.
    - Application capture and portability became strategic.
    	- to be portable, we need standards! We want it to work **everywhere**.
        	- Standards have now become **strategic** for business. 
            
IBM, in 1985, sold giant hardware computers. They sold these monolithic machines with no operating system. The operating system Windows was chosen and it became more and more popular in demand than the actual computer. It became a **standard**. 

Basically, if you don't meet the standard, then your system **is not used!!!**

## Abstractions - an Object-Oriented View ##
- My execution platform implements objects
	- could be bytes, longs, strings
    - processes, files, sessions
- Object defined by its properties, methods and their semantics.
- Hardware is fast, but complex and limited.
	- It should be treated as a building block, but NOT a solution!
- We need to **encapsulate** the implementation details.
	- Error handling, optimization, eliminate/hide behavior irrelevant to user

Some interesting problems:
- Persistent vs transient memory
- Size of operations
- Coherence and atomicity
- Latency
- Same abstraction might be implemented with diferent physical devices
	- one size fits all

At the bottom, the OS doesn't have abstract devices... Only physical. So the OS **needs to create the abstract hardware that's desired with the resource of a physical, limited hardware.**

- Files
	- Need to write/read large chunks that the hardware doesn't have
    - Need to fail gracefully(not say missing sector)
    - Need to persist and be fast to read
    - Decide how big of a chunk to read(should we over-read?)
    
- Interpreters (process)
	- At the hardware level, we have a CPU.
    - Instruction reference
    	- Tells interpreter next instruction(program counter)
    - Repertoire
    	- Set of things interpreter can do(source code)
    - Environment reference
    	- Describe current state(stack heap registers)
    - Interrupts
    	- Interrupts current instruction

Furthermore, this would be alright if interpreters were for one process at a time. However, this does not really work because we want to switch back and forth between processes.

- Communications (sockets, networks)
	- Send
    	- Send some info to the buffer
    - Receive
    	- Look at the incoming message buffer
    - Issues
    	- Highly variable performance
        - Asynchronous
        - Receiver only perform operation because SEND occured.
        - Additional complications because remote machine.

On the same machine, just use memory to perform the transfer. However, more complicated when one is a remote machine... **When things are remote, there's higher uncertainty, greater asynchrony, and more security problems.**

# Generalizing Abstractions #
- How can applications deal with many varied resources?
- Make many things look the same!
	- Lowest Common Denominator base class.
    	- e.g. PDF for printers, SCSI/SATA/SAS for disks
- Involves a **federation framework**.
	- Make all hard drives accept the same commands.
    	- First create the high level, and then **plug in your values in the bottom using the action specified in the high level**.
    - For the models that are not the lowest common denominator, give extra "optional features".
    - It may not be present but can be tested for.


A downside of layering is that it adds performance penalties because we are going indiretly up couple levels of implementation, involving extra operations. 

# What is a process? #
- An executing instance of a program.
	- Its own little virtual machine(has its very own set of hardware).
# What is a state? #
- The mode of a process
	- Characterize object's current condition.
    	- Complex operations = complex state

# Shared Libraries #
- Static libraries are added to load module
	- program must be relinked to get new version
- Make code shared
	- One in-memory copy shared by all processes <-- also called a shared library!
    - Reduced memory use, faster program loads!
    - Easier to update the library! If we update it, all executables can just take the new version. We just need to re-link.
    
## Handling Processes ##
**Where do processes come from?**

- From the OS
	- The first process is called the init process. Every other process comes from it.
    	- The **parent** process creates the **child** process.

Every process has a **process descriptor**. The descriptor is saved in the **process table**. The process table takes care of organizing all the processes.

Every process needs memory, stack, heap, initial registers, etc.

**How do processes get created?**

1. Start with a blank process
	- Windows does this.
    - Starts with no resources or anything. We inject the code, memory, etc by passing in parameters.
2. Process forking
	- Linux/Unix does this.
    - Avoids copying a lot of code(*if* it is the same code as the parent's...)
    	- parallel processing before used a cloning fork.
        - allowed parallelism before threads were invented.
    - easy to manage shared resources.
  	- Each has different process ID's, but they have pretty much the same thing.
    	- Same code, same program counter
    - Write some code to figure out which one is which. (as in parent and child)
    	- Parent sees pid from child. Child has pid of 0 from fork().
        - Fork child shares same code but not the memory. 
        	- Since copying is very expensive, we give the child the **copy-on-write** priorities. Upon having to write, we would have to copy the code. 
    - Usually you don't want to just fork and run the child to do the same thing. We call it **exec()**.
3. Exec
	- Changes the code associated with a process, and resets its state. 
    - Throwing away the data areas is easy if we're using **copy-on-write**.

## Loading programs ##
- A **load module** resolve external references, combine all modules into a few segments, and has the code, data, etc.
	- However, you can't execute a load module.
    - On disk, you have:
    	- ELF header: load sections, which architecture, etc.
        - Section 1 header: compiled code
        - Section 2: Initialized data vals
        - Section 3: Symbol table
        
    - Now we need to move these headers into the process. We need a **loader and linkage editor** for this.
    
## Loading processes ##

- To run process on a core, need hardware to initialize.
- Load the core's registers, stack & stack ptr & program counter.
- We run the program using the **limited direct execution** (explained later on).
	- Basic idea: OS does not handle the process/intervene. Some instructions from user mode triggers trap in which the OS responds to. 
    
## Using traps for System Calls ##

- Reserve 1 privileged instruction for system calls
1. The user runs instructions... and then a trap!
2. moves to supervisor mode: puts the program counter and status word inside of a TRAP table.
3. Checks the system call dispatch table(what does this trap do?) [1st level trap handler]
	1. The specific mapping from trap to instruction is called the trap gate.
4. Does the system call [2nd level trap handler] and returns to user mode.

- We have a normal user-mode stack for normal instructions. Our system calls has its own supervisor-mode stack for whenever it runs a call. 

## Destroying Processes ##

- When a process terminates, the OS needs to clean up.
	- get rid of the resources that it was given.
        - Memory
        	- However, not all of its memory is cleaned up. Some code is shared!
        - Locks
        - Access to hardware devices
    - Inform other processes that it died.
    	- Does this mean the pipes give SIGPIPE?	

# Scheduling #

- Time sharing:
	- Fast response time to interactive programs
- Batch:
	- Maximize total system throughput
    - Delays of individual processes are unimportant
- Real-time:
	- Critical operations must happen on time
    - Non-critical might never happen (starve)

- Measuring CPU Scheduling:
	- Time spent running
    - Time spent waiting for resources/completions
    - Time spent waiting to run

## Non-preemptive scheduling algorithms

- First come first serve:
	- Run first process on ready queue
    - Highly variable delays
    - Used when:
    	- In batch systems, response time is not important
        - In embedded systems, computations are brief and events only happen after others have finished.

## Real-time schedulers ##

- Things **must** happen at particular times
	- systems must schedule on basis of real-time deadlines
    - e.g. Machine must control a production pipeline via conveyor belt.
    	- If it doesn't respond in the correct time during a conveyer belt then we have a defect.
        
### Hard real-time schedulers ###

- **Cannot** miss any deadlines.
	- System fails if deadline is not met.
    - How can we ensure no missed deadlines?
    	- Make sure no possible schedule causes a deadline to be missed.
        - Calculate it out ahead of time
        - All permutations of schedules are used to follow deadlines
- You need to know exactly how long each process takes.
- Vital to avoid non-deterministic timings. 
	- Screwed if any processes slow down (not according to plan).
- No interrupts
- Non-preemptive (you don't want the operating system to step in for no reason)
	- The opposite, preemptive, allows any process to be yielded at any time.
    	- enables fair share schedling
        - Uses a lot of context switches

### Soft real-time schedulers ###

- Might drop the job whose deadline missed
	- Might allow system to fall behind
- Uses the algorithm **Earliest Deadline First**.
- Example: Video playing on youtube
	- frames come and each frame should be rendered on time
    - Occasionally frames are not rendered on time.
    	- If can't, just skip it and go to next frame.

### Costs of a Context Switch ###

1. Enter the OS
2. Scheduler/Dispatcher choose who runs
3. Move context to new process
4. Switching process' memory spaces

<script src="https://utteranc.es/client.js" repo="OneRaynyDay/oneraynyday.github.io" issue-term="pathname" theme="github-light" crossorigin="anonymous" async> </script>
