---
published: true
title: Evaluation Strategy
category: cs
layout: default
---
# Evaluation Strategy

# Table of Contents

* TOC
{:toc}

# Call By Value

Copies the arguments into the callee.

**Pros:**
- Immutability via copying.

**Cons:**
- If values are large, slow copying.
- If we try to pass by address, leads to unreliable code.

# Call By Reference

Passes arguments as references into callee.

**Pros:**
- Large objects do not need to be copied.

**Cons:**
- Cause trouble with shared variables because
now all objects have state. Especially bad with heap variables.

# Call By Result

Passes arguments into the function, with 1 of them being a reference to the result that the function fills in.

**Pros:**
- Useful if want multiple return values(i.e. answer, error codes, etc)

**Cons:**
- Caller needs to do extra work, API complicates.

# Call By Value-Result

Same as call by result, but that parameter that will contain the value, will also be used as a variable before the answer is filled in.

**Pros:**
- Saving space, maybe?

**Cons:**
- Really complicates the strategy

# Call By Name

Calls by name sends the full expression as variables into the function.

For something like:

```c++
void f(... a, ... b){
    ...
}

f(x+1, x)
```

We are legitimately sending an lvalue expression(x+1) that is _not yet evaluated_, and an rvalue expression(x) that is also not yet evaluated(we don't know its address) into f.

To get the value out, we kind of treat them as lambdas, and `a` will give us an lvalue and `b` will give us an rvalue address. We will be updating whatever `x` we were using, as if it was passed by reference.

**Pros:**
- Delays evaluation, so control flow can optimize evaluation scheme.

**Cons:**
- Really inefficient to write in real life.

# Call By Need

The same as call by name, but **memoizes** the results of the computation. `a` and `b` are bounded to the results after their first evaluation.

However, this gives different side-effects:

```c++
void f(by-need int a, by-need int b){
    b = a; // 'i = i+1' -> gives us &i = 4.
    // a -> 4
    // b -> &i
    b = a; // Already cached: &i = 4.
}

void g(){
    int i = 3;
    f(i+1, i);
    return i;
}
```

**Pros:**
- Caches, so it is much faster than call-by-name
- Doesn't crash when the crashing parameter isn't evaluated.

**Cons:**
- Still hard to implement.

<script src="https://utteranc.es/client.js" repo="OneRaynyDay/oneraynyday.github.io" issue-term="pathname" theme="github-light" crossorigin="anonymous" async> </script>
