---
published: false
title: RTFM & How To Make One In Sphinx 
layout: default
---

## Small Rant

I genuinely believe that millions of hours are wasted every year because people don't read the documentation. Actually - noone reads the documentation, that's why StackOverflow has billions of page views!

If people read the manual, and found an undocumented bug, then sure. **But the truth is, people ask questions without googling/man-paging them.** 

I'm a culprit too - I wasted so many hours because I _assumed_ what was on the specs of a CS project(Prof. Nachenberg's 60-something page specs), or I asked someone for help, only to get _utterly d-e-s-t-r-o-y-e-d_ about not reading the documentation.

So yeah, RTFM, it's good for you.

## Get Started

A simple, intuitive documentation tool is **sphinx**. It's used for the entire python docs, and much more. It's well supported, allows doctesting in python, supports LaTeX, and much more.

To start with one, make sure your `pip` version is up to date. Right now, I have this:

```
~ $ pip install sphinx
...
~ $ python -c "import sphinx; print(sphinx.__version__)"     
1.5.6
```

Let's make a sphinx doc:

```
~ $ sphinx-quickstart
```

It will ask you for a couple(lots) of options in commandline before initializing itself. Most of these can be changed manually in its `conf.py` file, so don't sweat it if you feel like you've made a mistake.

## Directory Structure

```
docs
- build # empty unless built, also optional
- source
	- conf.py
	- index.rst # unless you specified otherwise
	- {prefix}static # prefix = _ unless specified
	- {prefix}templates # prefix = _ unless specified
- Makefile
```

Usually, documentation should be in a folder called `docs` inside of your github repo, which contains 2 folders `build`, and `source` if you decided to segregate them, and no `build` otherwise. 

The `Makefile` is important. Some 





